# Summary
## Language History and Change
Philology is a study of language history and change. As it developed in the nineteenth century “family trees” were created, showing how languages were related to one another. First, however, it had to be established which of the many languages were of the same family.
## Family Trees
According to a British government official Sir William Jones, the Sanskrit language cannot have been produced by accident. This hypothesis was one of the first ideas which implied that languages share a common ancestor. In the 19th century this ancient language has earned a name - *Proto-Indo-European* and scholars started looking for common features in modern languages which sprouted into a family tree of different branches of Indo-European languages.
## Indo-European
Indo-European is one of the language families with the largest population and distribution in the world. There are about thirty such families and 7,097 known languages in the world. The languages of the Indo-European family, though seemingly different, start having more similarities as one looks at the older generation languages. Through a simple comparison of Latin, Sanskrit and Ancient Greek some common features become apparent. Although it is unlikely to find many words with clear similarities, they are enough to make an assumption that certain languages might be related.
The process of finding connections between sets of words is based on using cognates, which are words in languages that resemble one another in form and possibly meaning.
## Comparative Reconstruction
Comparative reconstruction is a procedure of reconstructing information from different, but related languages using sets of cognates. It allows researchers to recreate the possible form of the  “proto” language. This reconstruction is bound by two principles, namely, the majority and the most natural development principle. The first one states that if in a set a particular phoneme appears noticeably more often in comparison to another one, it is highly probable that it was the original sound. The latter discerns between typical, common changes such as final devoicing (e.g. *rizu* > *ris*) and the ones that are unlikely. 
## The History of English
Even if there exist written records of an older period in a language the attempt to reconstruct it is difficult, because there may not be much resemblance to the modern language. In English for instance some letters became redundant - for example “thorn” and “eth” changed into “th”. Traditionally there are four periods of English: Old English (before 1100 AD), Middle English (before 1500 AD), Early Modern English (before 1700AD) and Modern English (after 1700AD).
### Old English
The northern European tribes that moved into the British Isles in the 5th century brought with them the Germanic languages that developed into English. Nowadays, their linguistic remains are for example *mete* (food, meat), *drincan* (drink). The tribes of Angles, Saxons and Jutes, from which the name Anglo-Saxons was coined, were pagan only until the 6th century when many converted to Christianity. Religion brought a vast array of Latin lexicon with itself - examples include: *priest*, *school*, and *fever*. In the 9th century the Vikings came to the Isles, bringing with them their language - Old Norse and with it original forms of *die*, *law*, *leg*, *sky*, some days of the week *Tiw’s day*, *Thor’s day* among many more terms.
### Middle English
Upon the arrival of Norman French in England, the period of Middle English began. As the official language became French, some of its vocabulary was assimilated into the English language - for example *court, faith, govern*. Between the years of 1400 and 1600, English vowels underwent a significant change that came to be known as the “Great Vowel Shift”. Its raising of long vowels, among other changes, contributed to the pronunciation of Early Modern English.
These changes can be divided into two categories: external changes and internal changes. An example of the former are borrowings from French or Old Norse, while the latter can be reflected by the sound changes.
## Sound Changes
There are various types of sound changes. When a sound simply disappears from the pronunciation of a word, the process is called **sound loss**. For instance, the initial [h] was lost in many words from Old English, like in  *hlud - loud* or *hlaford - lord*. Another type is **metathesis**. In this process two sounds in a word are reversed, e.g. *frist - first*, *hros - horse*.This reversal can also occur between non-adjoining sounds. An example of it can be observed with the Spanish word *palabra* which is derived from Latin *parabola*. 
Next sound change is called **epenthesis** and it involves an addition of a sound to the middle of a word, e.g. *spinel - spindle*, *timr - timber*. Finally, there is **prothesis**. Though it cannot be observed in English, it is a change in which a sound is added to the beginning of a word. Examples of this process can be found in the evolution of some forms from Latin to Spanish - *schola - escuela*, *sperare - esperar*.
## Syntactic Changes
Another type of change can be noticed in syntax. The typical Old English word order is the same in Modern English (SVO), however Old English featured a number of different orders (e.g. ferde he - travelled he; he hine geseah - he him saw). Word order is not the only difference. Old English allowed double negative and did not require an auxiliary verb in front of the negative (ne sealde - *not gave - did not give). Still, the biggest difference in syntax over time is the loss of inflectional suffixes which all nouns, adjectives, articles and pronouns used in Old English, but do not use in the modern variation.
## Semantic Changes
Semantic change is probably the most obvious way in which the now and then English differs. A vast number of words came into use by means of borrowing. On the other hand, a number of terms is no longer heard, because it is no longer needed (e.g. foin, a thrust of a sword). Semantic change may result in meaning shifting as in Modern English adverbs awful, dreadful or horrible no longer indicating horror, but being used in place of very, extremely. An interesting change happened in the use of literally, formerly only meaning “not figuratively”, but now also gaining the meaning “figuratively”, depending on the context.
Two other types of semantic change include broadening and narrowing of the meaning. Food is an example of broadening - Old English term foda (fodder) became used for all kinds of food. Reverse process, narrowing, happened with the Old English word mete meaning any type of food, changing into meat which only defines specific types. Narrowing also happens when a term loses a part of its meaning, leading to negative connotations, such as vulgar turning from ordinary into explicitly offensive. 
## Diachronic and Synchronic Variation
Though some changes can be linked to major historical events, most of them find their source in the ongoing process of cultural transmission.
The variation in language can be viewed either *diachronically* (from historical perspective of changes over a period of time) or *synchronically* (through differences within one language among different groups at a given time).
